docs/how-to/calculate-statistics.md, before:

---
title: Calculate Statistics
---

# Calculate Statistics

This guide covers how to use `clam stat` to calculate population genetic statistics from a VCF using callable site information.

## Prerequisites

- A VCF file (bgzipped and tabix indexed)
- Callable loci Zarr from `clam loci` (recommended)
- Optional: population file for d~xy~ and F~ST~
- Optional: ROH file for calculating non-ROH heterozygosity

## Input Requirements

### VCF File

The input VCF must be bgzipped and tabix indexed:

```bash
bgzip variants.vcf
tabix -p vcf variants.vcf.gz
```

### Callable Sites

While optional, providing callable sites from `clam loci` is strongly recommended for accurate statistics:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr variants.vcf.gz
```

Without callable sites, all positions in the VCF are assumed callable, which can bias diversity estimates if you have missing data.

## Basic Usage

### Fixed-Size Windows

Calculate statistics in fixed-size windows across the genome:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr variants.vcf.gz
```

This calculates π (and d~xy~, F~ST~ if populations are defined) in 10kb windows.

### Custom Regions

Calculate statistics for specific regions defined in a BED file:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ --regions-file genes.bed -c callable.zarr variants.vcf.gz
```

## Specifying Populations

To calculate between-population statistics (d~xy~ and F~ST~), provide a population file:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -p populations.tsv variants.vcf.gz
```

The population file maps samples to populations:

```
sample1	PopA
sample2	PopA
sample3	PopB
sample4	PopB
```

!!! note "Sample Names"
    Sample names must exactly match those in your VCF header.

### Handling Missing Samples

By default, clam errors if the VCF contains samples not in the population file. To instead warn and exclude those samples:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -p populations.tsv --force-samples variants.vcf.gz
```

## Using ROH Data

If you have runs of homozygosity (ROH) calls, clam can calculate non-ROH heterozygosity by excluding samples within ROH regions at each site:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -r roh.bed.gz variants.vcf.gz
```

Non-ROH heterozygosity can serve as a proxy for the inbreeding load in a population ([Kardos et al. 2025](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016953472500182X)).

The ROH file must be:

- BED format with sample name in the 4th column
- bgzipped and tabix indexed

```bash
# Prepare ROH file
sort -k1,1 -k2,2n roh.bed > roh.sorted.bed
bgzip roh.sorted.bed
tabix -p bed roh.sorted.bed.gz
```

When ROH data is provided, the `heterozygosity.tsv` output includes additional columns for ROH-excluded statistics (`het_not_in_roh`, `callable_not_in_roh`, `heterozygosity_not_in_roh`).

See [Input Formats](../reference/input-formats.md#roh-file) for file format details.

## Filtering Chromosomes

### Exclude Specific Chromosomes

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -x chrM,chrY variants.vcf.gz
```

### Include Only Specific Chromosomes

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -i chr1,chr2,chr3 variants.vcf.gz
```

## Output Files

`clam stat` produces tab-separated files in the output directory:

| File | Description | Generated |
|------|-------------|-----------|
| `pi.tsv` | Nucleotide diversity per population | Always |
| `dxy.tsv` | Absolute divergence between populations | When >1 population |
| `fst.tsv` | Fixation index between populations | When >1 population |
| `heterozygosity.tsv` | Per-sample or per-population heterozygosity | When callable sites provided |

The `heterozygosity.tsv` file contains per-sample heterozygosity when using per-sample callable masks (`--per-sample` in `clam loci`), or per-population heterozygosity when using population counts. When ROH data is provided, additional columns report heterozygosity excluding samples in ROH regions.

See [Output Formats](../reference/output-formats.md#clam-stat-output) for column descriptions.

## Performance

Use multiple threads for faster processing:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -t 16 variants.vcf.gz
```

The chunk size affects parallelization and memory usage:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr --chunk-size 500000 variants.vcf.gz
```

!!! tip
    If you used `clam loci` with a specific chunk size, `clam stat` automatically uses the same chunk size when reading the callable Zarr.

## Complete Example

```bash
# Calculate pi, dxy, and Fst in 50kb windows
# - Use callable sites from loci
# - Define two populations
# - Calculate non-ROH heterozygosity
# - Exclude mitochondria
# - Use 16 threads
clam stat \
  -o results/ \
  -w 50000 \
  -c callable.zarr \
  -p populations.tsv \
  -r roh.bed.gz \
  -x chrM \
  -t 16 \
  variants.vcf.gz
```

## Working with Results

### Python

```python
import pandas as pd

pi = pd.read_csv("results/pi.tsv", sep="\t")
dxy = pd.read_csv("results/dxy.tsv", sep="\t")
fst = pd.read_csv("results/fst.tsv", sep="\t")

# Plot pi across chromosome 1
chr1_pi = pi[pi["chrom"] == "chr1"]
chr1_pi.plot(x="start", y="pi", kind="line")
```

### R

```r
library(tidyverse)

pi <- read_tsv("results/pi.tsv")
dxy <- read_tsv("results/dxy.tsv")
fst <- read_tsv("results/fst.tsv")

# Plot pi by population
ggplot(pi, aes(x=start, y=pi, color=population)) +
  geom_line() +
  facet_wrap(~chrom)
```

Commit message:

fix: population handling 41 (#45)
* fix: auto-read populations from zarr metadata and validate consistency

Previously, clam loci discarded population metadata stored in zarr input
and clam stat panicked when population counts didn't match the callable
zarr columns. Also, --samples and zarr positional args were mutually
exclusive for clam loci.

* docs: update docs to reflect samples and pops changes

docs/how-to/calculate-statistics.md, after:

---
title: Calculate Statistics
---

# Calculate Statistics

This guide covers how to use `clam stat` to calculate population genetic statistics from a VCF using callable site information.

## Prerequisites

- A VCF file (bgzipped and tabix indexed)
- Callable loci Zarr from `clam loci` (recommended)
- Optional: population file or `--samples` TSV for d~xy~ and F~ST~ (not needed if callable zarr already contains population metadata)
- Optional: ROH file for calculating non-ROH heterozygosity

## Input Requirements

### VCF File

The input VCF must be bgzipped and tabix indexed:

```bash
bgzip variants.vcf
tabix -p vcf variants.vcf.gz
```

### Callable Sites

While optional, providing callable sites from `clam loci` is strongly recommended for accurate statistics:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr variants.vcf.gz
```

Without callable sites, all positions in the VCF are assumed callable, which can bias diversity estimates if you have missing data.

## Basic Usage

### Fixed-Size Windows

Calculate statistics in fixed-size windows across the genome:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr variants.vcf.gz
```

This calculates π (and d~xy~, F~ST~ if populations are defined) in 10kb windows.

### Custom Regions

Calculate statistics for specific regions defined in a BED file:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ --regions-file genes.bed -c callable.zarr variants.vcf.gz
```

## Specifying Populations

To calculate between-population statistics (d~xy~ and F~ST~), clam needs population assignments. There are three ways to provide them:

### Automatic from Callable Zarr (Recommended)

If populations were defined during the `clam loci` step, they are stored in the callable Zarr metadata. `clam stat` reads them automatically -- no extra flags needed:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr variants.vcf.gz
```

This produces `dxy.tsv` and `fst.tsv` automatically when the callable zarr contains multiple populations.

### Using --samples

Provide a samples TSV to define (or override) population assignments:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -s samples.tsv variants.vcf.gz
```

Only the `sample_name` and `population` columns are used; `file_path` is ignored for `clam stat`.

### Using --population-file (Deprecated)

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -p populations.tsv variants.vcf.gz
```

The population file maps samples to populations:

```
sample1	PopA
sample2	PopA
sample3	PopB
sample4	PopB
```

!!! warning "Population Consistency"
    When using `--samples` or `--population-file` with a callable Zarr that has `PopulationCounts` type, the number of populations must match the number of population columns in the Zarr. If they don't match, clam will produce a clear error. Use callable sites generated with `--per-sample` mode for maximum flexibility with different population definitions at stat time.

!!! note "Sample Names"
    Sample names must exactly match those in your VCF header.

### Handling Missing Samples

By default, clam errors if the VCF contains samples not in the population file. To instead warn and exclude those samples:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -p populations.tsv --force-samples variants.vcf.gz
```

## Using ROH Data

If you have runs of homozygosity (ROH) calls, clam can calculate non-ROH heterozygosity by excluding samples within ROH regions at each site:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -r roh.bed.gz variants.vcf.gz
```

Non-ROH heterozygosity can serve as a proxy for the inbreeding load in a population ([Kardos et al. 2025](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016953472500182X)).

The ROH file must be:

- BED format with sample name in the 4th column
- bgzipped and tabix indexed

```bash
# Prepare ROH file
sort -k1,1 -k2,2n roh.bed > roh.sorted.bed
bgzip roh.sorted.bed
tabix -p bed roh.sorted.bed.gz
```

When ROH data is provided, the `heterozygosity.tsv` output includes additional columns for ROH-excluded statistics (`het_not_in_roh`, `callable_not_in_roh`, `heterozygosity_not_in_roh`).

See [Input Formats](../reference/input-formats.md#roh-file) for file format details.

## Filtering Chromosomes

### Exclude Specific Chromosomes

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -x chrM,chrY variants.vcf.gz
```

### Include Only Specific Chromosomes

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -i chr1,chr2,chr3 variants.vcf.gz
```

## Output Files

`clam stat` produces tab-separated files in the output directory:

| File | Description | Generated |
|------|-------------|-----------|
| `pi.tsv` | Nucleotide diversity per population | Always |
| `dxy.tsv` | Absolute divergence between populations | When >1 population |
| `fst.tsv` | Fixation index between populations | When >1 population |
| `heterozygosity.tsv` | Per-sample or per-population heterozygosity | When callable sites provided |

The `heterozygosity.tsv` file contains per-sample heterozygosity when using per-sample callable masks (`--per-sample` in `clam loci`), or per-population heterozygosity when using population counts. When ROH data is provided, additional columns report heterozygosity excluding samples in ROH regions.

See [Output Formats](../reference/output-formats.md#clam-stat-output) for column descriptions.

## Performance

Use multiple threads for faster processing:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr -t 16 variants.vcf.gz
```

The chunk size affects parallelization and memory usage:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr --chunk-size 500000 variants.vcf.gz
```

!!! tip
    If you used `clam loci` with a specific chunk size, `clam stat` automatically uses the same chunk size when reading the callable Zarr.

## Complete Example

```bash
# Calculate pi, dxy, and Fst in 50kb windows
# - Use callable sites from loci
# - Define two populations
# - Calculate non-ROH heterozygosity
# - Exclude mitochondria
# - Use 16 threads
clam stat \
  -o results/ \
  -w 50000 \
  -c callable.zarr \
  -p populations.tsv \
  -r roh.bed.gz \
  -x chrM \
  -t 16 \
  variants.vcf.gz
```

## Working with Results

### Python

```python
import pandas as pd

pi = pd.read_csv("results/pi.tsv", sep="\t")
dxy = pd.read_csv("results/dxy.tsv", sep="\t")
fst = pd.read_csv("results/fst.tsv", sep="\t")

# Plot pi across chromosome 1
chr1_pi = pi[pi["chrom"] == "chr1"]
chr1_pi.plot(x="start", y="pi", kind="line")
```

### R

```r
library(tidyverse)

pi <- read_tsv("results/pi.tsv")
dxy <- read_tsv("results/dxy.tsv")
fst <- read_tsv("results/fst.tsv")

# Plot pi by population
ggplot(pi, aes(x=start, y=pi, color=population)) +
  geom_line() +
  facet_wrap(~chrom)
```
