docs/how-to/generate-callable-loci.md, before:

---
title: Generate Callable Loci
---

# Generate Callable Loci

This guide covers how to use `clam loci` to identify genomic regions with sufficient sequencing depth to be considered callable.

## Prerequisites

- Depth files in one of the supported formats:
    - Per-sample D4 files (uncompressed or bgzipped with index)
    - Merged D4 files (uncompressed only)
    - GVCF files (bgzipped and tabix indexed)
    - A Zarr store from `clam collect`
- Optional: population file if analyzing multiple populations

## Input Formats

### D4 Files

D4 files contain per-base depth estimates. You can generate them from BAM files using [mosdepth](https://github.com/brentp/mosdepth):

```bash
# Generate D4 from BAM
mosdepth --d4 sample sample.bam

# Compress and index (required by clam)
bgzip sample.per-base.d4
bgzip --index sample.per-base.d4.gz
```

### GVCF Files

GVCF files must be bgzipped and tabix indexed:

```bash
bgzip sample.g.vcf
tabix -p vcf sample.g.vcf.gz
```

## Basic Usage

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 sample1.d4.gz sample2.d4.gz sample3.d4.gz
```

This identifies sites where each sample has at least 10x depth.

## Setting Depth Thresholds

### Per-Sample Thresholds

Control which sites are callable at the individual sample level:

`-m, --min-depth`
:   Minimum depth required. Sites below this are not callable.

`-M, --max-depth`
:   Maximum depth allowed. Sites above this are not callable (often repetitive regions).

```bash
# Require 10-100x depth per sample
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -M 100 *.d4.gz
```

### Site-Level Thresholds

Apply filters across all samples at each site:

`-d, --min-proportion`
:   Fraction of samples that must pass thresholds (0.0-1.0).

`--min-mean-depth`
:   Minimum mean depth across samples.

`--max-mean-depth`
:   Maximum mean depth across samples.

```bash
# Require 80% of samples to be callable at each site
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -d 0.8 *.d4.gz
```

### Per-Chromosome Thresholds

For sex chromosomes or organellar genomes, use a thresholds file:

```bash
# thresholds.tsv
chr1	10	100
chr2	10	100
chrX	5	50
chrY	5	50
chrM	100	10000
```

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr --thresholds-file thresholds.tsv *.d4.gz
```

See [Input Formats](../reference/input-formats.md#per-chromosome-thresholds-file) for file format details.

## Specifying Populations

To calculate per-population callable counts (required for d~xy~ and F~ST~ downstream):

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -p populations.tsv *.d4.gz
```

The population file maps samples to populations:

```
sample1	PopA
sample2	PopA
sample3	PopB
sample4	PopB
```

!!! note "Sample Names"
    Sample names must exactly match the identifiers in your input files. For D4 files, this is typically the filename prefix (e.g., `sample1` for `sample1.d4.gz`).

See [Input Formats](../reference/input-formats.md#population-file) for details.

## Filtering Chromosomes

### Exclude Specific Chromosomes

```bash
# Inline
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -x chrM,chrY *.d4.gz

# From file
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --exclude-file exclude.txt *.d4.gz
```

### Include Only Specific Chromosomes

```bash
# Inline
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -i chr1,chr2,chr3 *.d4.gz

# From file
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --include-file autosomes.txt *.d4.gz
```

## Output Options

### Per-Sample Masks

By default, `clam loci` outputs callable counts per population. To output per-sample boolean masks instead:

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --per-sample *.d4.gz
```

This is useful when you need sample-level callability information for other analyses.

## Using GVCF Input

For GVCF files, you can filter by genotype quality (GQ):

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --min-gq 20 *.g.vcf.gz
```

## Performance

Use multiple threads for faster processing:

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -t 16 *.d4.gz
```

Adjust chunk size if needed (default 1Mb):

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --chunk-size 500000 *.d4.gz
```

## Complete Example

```bash
# Process 50 samples with populations, excluding sex chromosomes
clam loci \
  -o callable.zarr \
  -m 10 \
  -M 100 \
  -d 0.8 \
  -p populations.tsv \
  -x chrX,chrY,chrM \
  -t 16 \
  *.d4.gz
```

## Next Steps

Use the output with `clam stat` to calculate population genetic statistics:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr variants.vcf.gz
```

See [Calculate Statistics](calculate-statistics.md) for details.

Commit message:

fix: population handling 41 (#45)
* fix: auto-read populations from zarr metadata and validate consistency

Previously, clam loci discarded population metadata stored in zarr input
and clam stat panicked when population counts didn't match the callable
zarr columns. Also, --samples and zarr positional args were mutually
exclusive for clam loci.

* docs: update docs to reflect samples and pops changes

docs/how-to/generate-callable-loci.md, after:

---
title: Generate Callable Loci
---

# Generate Callable Loci

This guide covers how to use `clam loci` to identify genomic regions with sufficient sequencing depth to be considered callable.

## Prerequisites

- Depth files in one of the supported formats:
    - Per-sample D4 files (uncompressed or bgzipped with index)
    - Merged D4 files (uncompressed only)
    - GVCF files (bgzipped and tabix indexed)
    - A Zarr store from `clam collect`
- Optional: population file or `--samples` TSV if analyzing multiple populations (not needed if the Zarr input already contains population metadata)

## Input Formats

### D4 Files

D4 files contain per-base depth estimates. You can generate them from BAM files using [mosdepth](https://github.com/brentp/mosdepth):

```bash
# Generate D4 from BAM
mosdepth --d4 sample sample.bam

# Compress and index (required by clam)
bgzip sample.per-base.d4
bgzip --index sample.per-base.d4.gz
```

### GVCF Files

GVCF files must be bgzipped and tabix indexed:

```bash
bgzip sample.g.vcf
tabix -p vcf sample.g.vcf.gz
```

## Basic Usage

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 sample1.d4.gz sample2.d4.gz sample3.d4.gz
```

This identifies sites where each sample has at least 10x depth.

## Setting Depth Thresholds

### Per-Sample Thresholds

Control which sites are callable at the individual sample level:

`-m, --min-depth`
:   Minimum depth required. Sites below this are not callable.

`-M, --max-depth`
:   Maximum depth allowed. Sites above this are not callable (often repetitive regions).

```bash
# Require 10-100x depth per sample
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -M 100 *.d4.gz
```

### Site-Level Thresholds

Apply filters across all samples at each site:

`-d, --min-proportion`
:   Fraction of samples that must pass thresholds (0.0-1.0).

`--min-mean-depth`
:   Minimum mean depth across samples.

`--max-mean-depth`
:   Maximum mean depth across samples.

```bash
# Require 80% of samples to be callable at each site
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -d 0.8 *.d4.gz
```

### Per-Chromosome Thresholds

For sex chromosomes or organellar genomes, use a thresholds file:

```bash
# thresholds.tsv
chr1	10	100
chr2	10	100
chrX	5	50
chrY	5	50
chrM	100	10000
```

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr --thresholds-file thresholds.tsv *.d4.gz
```

See [Input Formats](../reference/input-formats.md#per-chromosome-thresholds-file) for file format details.

## Specifying Populations

To calculate per-population callable counts (required for d~xy~ and F~ST~ downstream):

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -p populations.tsv *.d4.gz
```

The population file maps samples to populations:

```
sample1	PopA
sample2	PopA
sample3	PopB
sample4	PopB
```

!!! note "Sample Names"
    Sample names must exactly match the identifiers in your input files. For D4 files, this is typically the filename prefix (e.g., `sample1` for `sample1.d4.gz`).

See [Input Formats](../reference/input-formats.md#population-file) for details.

### Using Populations from a Zarr Store

When your input is a Zarr store from `clam collect` (or a previous `clam loci` run) that already has population metadata, those populations are used automatically -- no `-p` or `--samples` flag needed:

```bash
# Populations stored in depths.zarr are used automatically
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 depths.zarr
```

To override the stored populations with different assignments, use `--samples`:

```bash
# Override populations from zarr with a new samples file
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 depths.zarr --samples samples.tsv
```

When using `--samples` with a Zarr input, the `file_path` column is not required -- only `sample_name` and `population` are needed:

```
sample_name	population
sample1	NewPopA
sample2	NewPopA
sample3	NewPopB
sample4	NewPopB
```

!!! note
    If no populations are stored in the Zarr metadata and no `--samples` or `-p` flag is given, all samples are grouped into a single "default" population.

## Filtering Chromosomes

### Exclude Specific Chromosomes

```bash
# Inline
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -x chrM,chrY *.d4.gz

# From file
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --exclude-file exclude.txt *.d4.gz
```

### Include Only Specific Chromosomes

```bash
# Inline
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -i chr1,chr2,chr3 *.d4.gz

# From file
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --include-file autosomes.txt *.d4.gz
```

## Output Options

### Per-Sample Masks

By default, `clam loci` outputs callable counts per population. To output per-sample boolean masks instead:

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --per-sample *.d4.gz
```

This is useful when you need sample-level callability information for other analyses.

## Using GVCF Input

For GVCF files, you can filter by genotype quality (GQ):

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --min-gq 20 *.g.vcf.gz
```

## Performance

Use multiple threads for faster processing:

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 -t 16 *.d4.gz
```

Adjust chunk size if needed (default 1Mb):

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --chunk-size 500000 *.d4.gz
```

## Complete Example

```bash
# Process 50 samples with populations, excluding sex chromosomes
clam loci \
  -o callable.zarr \
  -m 10 \
  -M 100 \
  -d 0.8 \
  -p populations.tsv \
  -x chrX,chrY,chrM \
  -t 16 \
  *.d4.gz
```

## Next Steps

Use the output with `clam stat` to calculate population genetic statistics:

```bash
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr variants.vcf.gz
```

See [Calculate Statistics](calculate-statistics.md) for details.
