docs/reference/input-formats.md, before:

---
title: Input File Formats
---

# Input File Formats

This page documents the file formats accepted by clam.

## Depth Files

### D4 Files

[D4](https://github.com/38/d4-format) is a compact format for storing per-base depth information.

**Formats accepted:**

- Uncompressed D4 (`.d4`)
- Bgzipped D4 with index (`.d4.gz` + `.d4.gz.gzi`)

**Generating D4 files:**

```bash
# Generate D4 from BAM using mosdepth
mosdepth --d4 sample sample.bam

# Optionally bgzip and index to save disk space
bgzip --index sample.per-base.d4
```

**Sample name extraction:**

When using positional arguments, clam extracts sample names from D4 filenames. For a file named `sample1.per-base.d4.gz`, the sample name is `sample1` (the part before the first `.`).

To use explicit sample names instead, use the `--samples` option with a [samples file](#samples-file).

### GVCF Files

[GVCF (Genomic VCF)](https://github.com/broadinstitute/gatk-docs/blob/master/gatk3-faqs/What_is_a_GVCF_and_how_is_it_different_from_a_%27regular%27_VCF%3F.md) files contain per-sample depth and genotype quality information at every position.

**Requirements:**

- Must be bgzipped (`.g.vcf.gz`)
- Must be tabix indexed (`.g.vcf.gz.tbi`)

**Generating indexed GVCFs:**

```bash
bgzip sample.g.vcf
tabix -p vcf sample.g.vcf.gz
```

**Sample name extraction:**

When using positional arguments, sample names are extracted from the filename. For a file named `sample1.g.vcf.gz`, the sample name is `sample1` (the part before the first `.`).

To use explicit sample names instead, use the `--samples` option with a [samples file](#samples-file).

---

## VCF Files

For `clam stat`, input VCF files must be bgzipped and tabix indexed.

**Requirements:**

- Must be bgzipped (`.vcf.gz`)
- Must be tabix indexed (`.vcf.gz.tbi`)

---

## Samples File

Specifies sample names, input file paths, and optionally population assignments. This is the recommended way to provide input to `clam loci` and `clam collect` as it allows explicit control over sample naming.

**Format:** Tab-separated with header. The `sample_name` and `file_path` columns are required; `population` is optional.

| Column        | Required | Description                     |
| ------------- | -------- | ------------------------------- |
| `sample_name` | Yes      | Unique sample identifier        |
| `file_path`   | Yes      | Path to depth file (D4 or GVCF) |
| `population`  | No       | Population assignment           |

**Example with populations:**

```
sample_name	file_path	population
sample1	/path/to/sample1.d4.gz	PopA
sample2	/path/to/sample2.d4.gz	PopA
sample3	/path/to/sample3.d4.gz	PopB
sample4	/path/to/sample4.d4.gz	PopB
```

**Example without populations:**

```
sample_name	file_path
sample1	/path/to/abc.sample1.d4.gz
sample2	/path/to/abc.sample2.d4.gz
sample3	/path/to/abc.sample3.d4.gz
```

**Notes:**

- Column order doesn't matter (detected from header)
- Sample names must be unique
- If the `population` column is present, all rows must have values
- If the `population` column is absent, all samples are assigned to a "default" population
- File paths can be absolute or relative to the current working directory
- Use this format when filenames don't match desired sample names (e.g., files named `abc.sample1.d4.gz` but you want sample name `sample1`)

**Usage:**

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --samples samples.tsv
clam collect -o depths.zarr --samples samples.tsv
```

---

## Population File

!!! warning "Deprecated"
    The `--population-file` option is deprecated. Use `--samples` with a `population` column instead.

Defines which samples belong to which population. Used by both `clam loci` and `clam stat`.

**Format:** Tab-separated, two columns, no header.

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| 1 | Sample name |
| 2 | Population name |

**Example:**

```
sample1	PopA
sample2	PopA
sample3	PopA
sample4	PopB
sample5	PopB
sample6	PopC
```

**Notes:**

- Sample names must exactly match those in your input files
- For D4 files, sample names are derived from filenames (the part before the first `.`)
- For VCF/GVCF files, sample names come from the file header
- Each sample should appear exactly once
- Population names can be any string (no spaces)

---

## Chromosome Include/Exclude Files

Specify chromosomes to include or exclude from analysis.

**Format:** One chromosome name per line, no header.

**Example (`exclude_chroms.txt`):**

```
chrM
chrY
chrUn_gl000220
```

**Example (`include_chroms.txt`):**

```
chr1
chr2
chr3
chr4
chr5
```

**Usage:**

```bash
# Exclude specific chromosomes
clam loci --exclude-file exclude_chroms.txt ...

# Only analyze specific chromosomes
clam loci --include-file include_chroms.txt ...
```

---

## Per-Chromosome Thresholds File

Specify different depth thresholds for different chromosomes. Useful for sex chromosomes or organellar genomes.

**Format:** Tab-separated, three columns, no header.

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| 1 | Chromosome name |
| 2 | Minimum depth |
| 3 | Maximum depth |

**Example:**

```
chr1	10	100
chr2	10	100
chrX	5	50
chrY	5	50
chrM	100	10000
```

**Notes:**

- Chromosomes not listed in the file will use the default thresholds from `-m` and `-M` options
- This allows setting lower thresholds for hemizygous chromosomes (X, Y in XY individuals)
- Mitochondrial/chloroplast genomes often need much higher thresholds

---

## ROH File

Specifies runs of homozygosity (ROH) regions per sample. Used by `clam stat` to exclude samples within ROH regions when calculating diversity, enabling estimation of non-ROH heterozygosity (π~non-ROH~).

**Format:** BED format (tab-separated) with sample name in the 4th column.

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| 1 | Chromosome |
| 2 | Start position (0-based) |
| 3 | End position |
| 4 | Sample name |

**Requirements:**

- Must be bgzipped (`.bed.gz`)
- Must be tabix indexed (`.bed.gz.tbi`)

**Example (`roh.bed`):**

```
chr1	1000000	2000000	sample1
chr1	5000000	5500000	sample1
chr1	1500000	2500000	sample2
chr2	3000000	4000000	sample1
```

**Preparing the file:**

```bash
# Sort by chromosome and position
sort -k1,1 -k2,2n roh.bed > roh.sorted.bed

# Compress and index
bgzip roh.sorted.bed
tabix -p bed roh.sorted.bed.gz
```

**Notes:**

- Sample names must match those in your VCF
- ROH regions can overlap between samples
- Coordinates are 0-based, half-open (standard BED format)

---

## Regions File

Specifies custom regions for calculating statistics in `clam stat`. Use this instead of `--window-size` for non-uniform windows or specific genomic features.

**Format:** Standard BED format (tab-separated).

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| 1 | Chromosome |
| 2 | Start position (0-based) |
| 3 | End position |

**Example (`genes.bed`):**

```
chr1	11869	14409
chr1	14404	29570
chr1	17369	17436
chr2	38814	46588
```

**Notes:**

- Coordinates are 0-based, half-open (standard BED format)
- Regions can be of variable size
- Regions should not overlap (statistics are calculated independently per region)
- Additional columns (name, score, etc.) are ignored

---

## Summary Table

| File Type | Extension | Index Required | Used By |
|-----------|-----------|----------------|---------|
| D4 depth | `.d4` or `.d4.gz` | `.d4.gz.gzi` (if compressed) | `loci`, `collect` |
| GVCF | `.g.vcf.gz` | `.g.vcf.gz.tbi` | `loci`, `collect` |
| VCF | `.vcf.gz` | `.vcf.gz.tbi` | `stat` |
| Samples | `.tsv` | No | `loci`, `collect` |
| Population | `.tsv` | No | `loci`, `stat` (deprecated for `loci`) |
| Chromosome list | `.txt` | No | `loci`, `stat`, `collect` |
| Thresholds | `.tsv` | No | `loci` |
| ROH | `.bed.gz` | `.bed.gz.tbi` | `stat` |
| Regions | `.bed` | No | `stat` |

Commit message:

fix: population handling 41 (#45)
* fix: auto-read populations from zarr metadata and validate consistency

Previously, clam loci discarded population metadata stored in zarr input
and clam stat panicked when population counts didn't match the callable
zarr columns. Also, --samples and zarr positional args were mutually
exclusive for clam loci.

* docs: update docs to reflect samples and pops changes

docs/reference/input-formats.md, after:

---
title: Input File Formats
---

# Input File Formats

This page documents the file formats accepted by clam.

## Depth Files

### D4 Files

[D4](https://github.com/38/d4-format) is a compact format for storing per-base depth information.

**Formats accepted:**

- Uncompressed D4 (`.d4`)
- Bgzipped D4 with index (`.d4.gz` + `.d4.gz.gzi`)

**Generating D4 files:**

```bash
# Generate D4 from BAM using mosdepth
mosdepth --d4 sample sample.bam

# Optionally bgzip and index to save disk space
bgzip --index sample.per-base.d4
```

**Sample name extraction:**

When using positional arguments, clam extracts sample names from D4 filenames. For a file named `sample1.per-base.d4.gz`, the sample name is `sample1` (the part before the first `.`).

To use explicit sample names instead, use the `--samples` option with a [samples file](#samples-file).

### GVCF Files

[GVCF (Genomic VCF)](https://github.com/broadinstitute/gatk-docs/blob/master/gatk3-faqs/What_is_a_GVCF_and_how_is_it_different_from_a_%27regular%27_VCF%3F.md) files contain per-sample depth and genotype quality information at every position.

**Requirements:**

- Must be bgzipped (`.g.vcf.gz`)
- Must be tabix indexed (`.g.vcf.gz.tbi`)

**Generating indexed GVCFs:**

```bash
bgzip sample.g.vcf
tabix -p vcf sample.g.vcf.gz
```

**Sample name extraction:**

When using positional arguments, sample names are extracted from the filename. For a file named `sample1.g.vcf.gz`, the sample name is `sample1` (the part before the first `.`).

To use explicit sample names instead, use the `--samples` option with a [samples file](#samples-file).

---

## VCF Files

For `clam stat`, input VCF files must be bgzipped and tabix indexed.

**Requirements:**

- Must be bgzipped (`.vcf.gz`)
- Must be tabix indexed (`.vcf.gz.tbi`)

---

## Samples File

Specifies sample names, input file paths, and optionally population assignments. This is the recommended way to provide input to `clam loci` and `clam collect` as it allows explicit control over sample naming.

**Format:** Tab-separated with header. The `sample_name` and `file_path` columns are required; `population` is optional.

| Column        | Required | Description                     |
| ------------- | -------- | ------------------------------- |
| `sample_name` | Yes      | Unique sample identifier        |
| `file_path`   | Conditional | Path to depth file (D4 or GVCF). Required for `collect` and `loci` with raw depth input. Not required when used with `loci` + zarr input (population override) or with `stat`. |
| `population`  | No       | Population assignment           |

**Example with populations:**

```
sample_name	file_path	population
sample1	/path/to/sample1.d4.gz	PopA
sample2	/path/to/sample2.d4.gz	PopA
sample3	/path/to/sample3.d4.gz	PopB
sample4	/path/to/sample4.d4.gz	PopB
```

**Example without populations:**

```
sample_name	file_path
sample1	/path/to/abc.sample1.d4.gz
sample2	/path/to/abc.sample2.d4.gz
sample3	/path/to/abc.sample3.d4.gz
```

**Example for population override (no file_path):**

```
sample_name	population
sample1	PopA
sample2	PopA
sample3	PopB
sample4	PopB
```

This format is used when providing `--samples` to:

- `clam loci` with a Zarr positional argument (population override only)
- `clam stat` (population assignment only)

**Notes:**

- Column order doesn't matter (detected from header)
- Sample names must be unique
- If the `population` column is present, all rows must have values
- If the `population` column is absent, all samples are assigned to a "default" population
- File paths can be absolute or relative to the current working directory
- When `file_path` is not required (e.g., `stat` or `loci` with zarr input), the column can be omitted entirely
- Use this format when filenames don't match desired sample names (e.g., files named `abc.sample1.d4.gz` but you want sample name `sample1`)

**Usage:**

```bash
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 --samples samples.tsv
clam loci -o callable.zarr -m 10 depths.zarr --samples samples.tsv  # population override
clam collect -o depths.zarr --samples samples.tsv
clam stat -o results/ -w 10000 -c callable.zarr --samples samples.tsv
```

---

## Population File

!!! warning "Deprecated"
    The `--population-file` option is deprecated. Use `--samples` with a `population` column instead.

Defines which samples belong to which population. Used by both `clam loci` and `clam stat`.

**Format:** Tab-separated, two columns, no header.

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| 1 | Sample name |
| 2 | Population name |

**Example:**

```
sample1	PopA
sample2	PopA
sample3	PopA
sample4	PopB
sample5	PopB
sample6	PopC
```

**Notes:**

- Sample names must exactly match those in your input files
- For D4 files, sample names are derived from filenames (the part before the first `.`)
- For VCF/GVCF files, sample names come from the file header
- Each sample should appear exactly once
- Population names can be any string (no spaces)

---

## Chromosome Include/Exclude Files

Specify chromosomes to include or exclude from analysis.

**Format:** One chromosome name per line, no header.

**Example (`exclude_chroms.txt`):**

```
chrM
chrY
chrUn_gl000220
```

**Example (`include_chroms.txt`):**

```
chr1
chr2
chr3
chr4
chr5
```

**Usage:**

```bash
# Exclude specific chromosomes
clam loci --exclude-file exclude_chroms.txt ...

# Only analyze specific chromosomes
clam loci --include-file include_chroms.txt ...
```

---

## Per-Chromosome Thresholds File

Specify different depth thresholds for different chromosomes. Useful for sex chromosomes or organellar genomes.

**Format:** Tab-separated, three columns, no header.

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| 1 | Chromosome name |
| 2 | Minimum depth |
| 3 | Maximum depth |

**Example:**

```
chr1	10	100
chr2	10	100
chrX	5	50
chrY	5	50
chrM	100	10000
```

**Notes:**

- Chromosomes not listed in the file will use the default thresholds from `-m` and `-M` options
- This allows setting lower thresholds for hemizygous chromosomes (X, Y in XY individuals)
- Mitochondrial/chloroplast genomes often need much higher thresholds

---

## ROH File

Specifies runs of homozygosity (ROH) regions per sample. Used by `clam stat` to exclude samples within ROH regions when calculating diversity, enabling estimation of non-ROH heterozygosity (π~non-ROH~).

**Format:** BED format (tab-separated) with sample name in the 4th column.

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| 1 | Chromosome |
| 2 | Start position (0-based) |
| 3 | End position |
| 4 | Sample name |

**Requirements:**

- Must be bgzipped (`.bed.gz`)
- Must be tabix indexed (`.bed.gz.tbi`)

**Example (`roh.bed`):**

```
chr1	1000000	2000000	sample1
chr1	5000000	5500000	sample1
chr1	1500000	2500000	sample2
chr2	3000000	4000000	sample1
```

**Preparing the file:**

```bash
# Sort by chromosome and position
sort -k1,1 -k2,2n roh.bed > roh.sorted.bed

# Compress and index
bgzip roh.sorted.bed
tabix -p bed roh.sorted.bed.gz
```

**Notes:**

- Sample names must match those in your VCF
- ROH regions can overlap between samples
- Coordinates are 0-based, half-open (standard BED format)

---

## Regions File

Specifies custom regions for calculating statistics in `clam stat`. Use this instead of `--window-size` for non-uniform windows or specific genomic features.

**Format:** Standard BED format (tab-separated).

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| 1 | Chromosome |
| 2 | Start position (0-based) |
| 3 | End position |

**Example (`genes.bed`):**

```
chr1	11869	14409
chr1	14404	29570
chr1	17369	17436
chr2	38814	46588
```

**Notes:**

- Coordinates are 0-based, half-open (standard BED format)
- Regions can be of variable size
- Regions should not overlap (statistics are calculated independently per region)
- Additional columns (name, score, etc.) are ignored

---

## Summary Table

| File Type | Extension | Index Required | Used By |
|-----------|-----------|----------------|---------|
| D4 depth | `.d4` or `.d4.gz` | `.d4.gz.gzi` (if compressed) | `loci`, `collect` |
| GVCF | `.g.vcf.gz` | `.g.vcf.gz.tbi` | `loci`, `collect` |
| VCF | `.vcf.gz` | `.vcf.gz.tbi` | `stat` |
| Samples | `.tsv` | No | `loci`, `collect`, `stat` |
| Population | `.tsv` | No | `loci`, `stat` (deprecated for `loci`) |
| Chromosome list | `.txt` | No | `loci`, `stat`, `collect` |
| Thresholds | `.tsv` | No | `loci` |
| ROH | `.bed.gz` | `.bed.gz.tbi` | `stat` |
| Regions | `.bed` | No | `stat` |
