---
title: Calculating Statistics
---
# Calculating Statistics


After generating callable loci, the next step is to calculate population genetic statistics using those regions and your variant data with `clam stat`.

## Inputs
`clam stat` requires two main inputs:

1. A VCF file containing variants: This must be a bgzipped and indexed VCF file.

2. Callable loci file: The D4 format file generated by `clam loci` that defines which regions have sufficient sequencing depth.

## Options
### Windows or Regions
You must specify either a window size or a regions file for which to calculate statistics:
`-w, --window-size`
:   Size of windows for statistics in base pairs.

`-r, --regions-file`
:   BED file specifying regions to calculate statistics for.

### Populations
To specify populations (`-p, --populations`), create a tab seperated file that maps samples to population labels:

```bash
sample1    population1
sample2    population1
sample3    population2
sample4    population2
sample5    population3
```

!!! note "Sample Names"
    The sample names in your population file must exactly the samples in the header of your VCF.


### Runs of Homozygosity
`--roh-file`
:   stat can accept per-sample runs of homozygosity (ROH) intervals to ignore spurious heterozygous calls when calculating stats.
    ROH file must be tab seperated with the following columns: `chrom, start, end, sample`

### Chromosome Filtering
You can select specific chromosomes to exclude or restrict your analysis to , see [CLI Reference](../cli_reference.md) for details.

## Outputs
`clam stat` generates several output files in the specified output directory:
1. `clam_pi.tsv`: Always generated.
2. `clam_dxy.tsv`: Only generated if populations were specified.
3. `clam_fst.tsv`: Only generated if populations were specified.
4. `clam_het.tsv`: Always generated.

These files are tab-separated and can be easily imported into R, Python, or other analysis tools.